Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the motor system and the control of movement.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Outline the organisation of the motor system.
The motor system is the part of the nervous system that plans,
initiates and controls movement, and it is organised hierarchically,
with several levels working together,
an organisation worth setting out as the framework for the control of movement.
The system is arranged as a hierarchy of three levels.
The highest level, the association and motor areas of the cerebral cortex,
is concerned with the intention, planning and initiation of voluntary movement.
The middle level, comprising the brainstem and the descending pathways,
translates the plan into the patterns of muscle activity and controls posture.
The lowest level, the spinal cord, contains the motor neurons that directly drive
the muscles, and the circuits for reflexes and basic patterns.
Working alongside this hierarchy are two great modulating systems — the basal
ganglia and the cerebellum — which do not drive the muscles directly but regulate
and refine the movement.
The final output is through the motor neurons of the spinal cord and brainstem —
the final common path — to the muscles.
So the motor system is organised hierarchically:
the cortex for the intention and planning of movement;
the brainstem and descending pathways for translating this and controlling posture;
and the spinal cord with its motor neurons and reflex circuits as the final common
path to the muscles; modulated by the basal ganglia and the cerebellum,
which refine the movement — a hierarchical organisation that plans,
initiates and controls movement.
Describe the motor unit and the final common path.
The point at which the nervous system finally acts on the muscle is the motor
neuron and the motor unit, the concept of which,
with Sherrington's final common path,
is fundamental to understanding the control of muscle, so it is worth describing.
The lower motor neuron is the neuron whose cell body lies in the ventral horn of
the spinal cord, or the motor nuclei of the brainstem,
and whose axon leaves to innervate the skeletal muscle fibres.
The motor unit is a single lower motor neuron together with all the muscle fibres
it innervates; when the neuron fires, all those fibres contract together,
so the motor unit is the smallest functional unit of motor activity.
The number of fibres per unit varies with the precision required — few in muscles
of fine control, many in large postural muscles.
The force of a muscle is graded by recruiting more motor units,
and by increasing their firing rate.
The lower motor neuron is the final common path, the term of Sherrington:
all the influences on movement — the descending commands, the reflexes,
the modulating systems — ultimately converge upon it,
and it alone connects the nervous system to the muscle,
so all motor control is exerted through it.
So the lower motor neuron, in the ventral horn or brainstem,
with the muscle fibres it innervates,
forms the motor unit — the smallest functional unit;
force being graded by recruiting units and increasing their firing;
and the lower motor neuron being Sherrington's final common path,
on which all motor influences converge and through which alone the nervous system
acts on muscle.
Describe the primary motor cortex and its organisation.
The primary motor cortex is the principal cortical area for the execution of
voluntary movement, and its organisation — somatotopic,
like the sensory cortex — is worth describing,
as it is the origin of the main descending motor pathway.
The primary motor cortex lies in the frontal lobe,
just in front of the central sulcus. It is the chief cortical region from which
voluntary movements are executed, giving rise to a large part of the corticospinal
tract that descends to the spinal motor neurons.
It is organised somatotopically: the body is mapped across it in an orderly
fashion, forming the motor homunculus,
in which the area of cortex devoted to each part is proportional not to its size
but to the precision of its control — so the hand,
the face and the muscles of speech occupy disproportionately large areas,
reflecting their fine control.
The motor cortex does not simply command individual muscles but encodes movements;
it works with the premotor and supplementary motor areas,
which are concerned with the planning and preparation of movement,
selecting and sequencing the movements that the primary cortex then executes.
So the primary motor cortex, in the frontal lobe before the central sulcus,
executes voluntary movement, giving rise to much of the corticospinal tract;
organised somatotopically as the motor homunculus,
with the area for each part proportional to the precision of its control — the hand
and face most represented; working with the premotor and supplementary areas that
plan and sequence the movements it executes — the cortical origin of voluntary
movement.
Describe the corticospinal tract and the descending motor pathways.
The commands of the motor cortex are conveyed to the spinal motor neurons by the
descending motor pathways, of which the corticospinal tract is the principal one
for voluntary movement, and an understanding of these, particularly their crossing,
is important clinically.
The corticospinal tract, also called the pyramidal tract,
is the main pathway for voluntary, especially skilled and fine, movement.
It arises from the motor and related cortical areas,
descends through the internal capsule and the brainstem,
and — importantly — the great majority of its fibres cross to the opposite side at
the junction of the brainstem and spinal cord,
in the medullary pyramids — the decussation;
it then descends in the spinal cord to act, directly or through interneurons,
on the lower motor neurons.
Because of the crossing, each side of the cortex controls the opposite side of the
body, so a lesion above the crossing causes weakness on the opposite side.
Other, older descending pathways arise from the brainstem — such as the
vestibulospinal and reticulospinal tracts — and are concerned chiefly with posture,
balance and gross movements, and with the control of muscle tone.
So the corticospinal, or pyramidal,
tract carries voluntary movement from the motor cortex,
descending and crossing in the medullary pyramids to act on the opposite side's
lower motor neurons — so each cortex controls the opposite side,
and a lesion above the crossing causes contralateral weakness;
while the brainstem pathways — vestibulospinal, reticulospinal — control posture,
balance and tone — the descending pathways conveying motor commands.
Distinguish upper and lower motor neuron lesions.
The distinction between an upper and a lower motor neuron lesion is one of the most
useful in clinical neurology, allowing the level of a motor problem to be
localised, and it follows directly from the organisation of the motor pathways,
so it is worth setting out.
The upper motor neuron is the descending neuron, from the cortex or brainstem,
that controls the lower motor neuron;
the lower motor neuron is the final common path,
from the ventral horn to the muscle. Their lesions produce contrasting pictures.
A lower motor neuron lesion — damage to the motor neuron or its axon — denervates
the muscle, causing weakness, a loss of tone — flaccidity — a loss of reflexes,
and, over time, marked wasting of the muscle, with fasciculations;
it is the picture of a muscle cut off from its nerve.
An upper motor neuron lesion — damage to the descending pathways — removes the
cortical control of the lower motor neuron,
but leaves it intact and released from inhibition; this causes weakness,
but with an increased tone — spasticity — increased, or exaggerated, reflexes,
and an extensor plantar response, with little wasting;
it is the picture of a released, disinhibited lower motor neuron.
So a lower motor neuron lesion causes weakness with flaccidity, lost reflexes,
wasting and fasciculations — the muscle denervated;
while an upper motor neuron lesion causes weakness with spasticity,
exaggerated reflexes, an extensor plantar and little wasting — the lower motor
neuron released from cortical control;
a contrast following from the motor organisation and central to clinical
localisation.
Describe the functions of the basal ganglia.
The basal ganglia are a group of deep nuclei that form one of the two great
modulating systems of movement, and although their workings are complex,
an understanding of their role, and of the consequences of their disorder,
is important, particularly given their disorders and the drugs affecting them.
The basal ganglia are a group of interconnected nuclei deep in the cerebral
hemispheres, including the striatum and related structures,
connected with the cortex and the thalamus in loops.
They do not directly drive the muscles, but modulate movement:
they are involved in the initiation and selection of movements,
facilitating the desired movement while suppressing unwanted ones,
and in the regulation of the amplitude and speed of movement,
and in aspects of motor learning and habit.
Their function depends importantly on the neurotransmitter dopamine,
supplied by the substantia nigra.
The importance of the basal ganglia is shown by the movement disorders that result
from their dysfunction, which are characteristically disorders not of weakness but
of the control of movement: a poverty and slowness of movement with rigidity and
tremor, as in Parkinson's disease, which results from the loss of the dopamine
supply; or, conversely, excessive, involuntary movements,
as in other basal ganglia disorders.
So the basal ganglia, deep nuclei connected with the cortex and thalamus in loops,
modulate movement — selecting and initiating desired movements,
suppressing unwanted ones, and regulating their amplitude — depending on dopamine
from the substantia nigra; their dysfunction causing disorders of movement control,
such as the poverty of movement, rigidity and tremor of Parkinson's disease from
dopamine loss — a modulating system central to movement and to its disorders.
Describe the functions of the cerebellum.
The cerebellum is the other great modulating system of movement,
concerned with the coordination, timing and accuracy of movement and with balance,
and an understanding of its role, shown clearly by the effects of its damage,
is worth giving.
The cerebellum, attached to the back of the brainstem,
receives extensive information — about the intended movement, from the cortex;
about the actual movement and the position of the body,
from the proprioceptors and the vestibular system;
and about the state of the muscles — and uses this to coordinate and refine
movement.
It does not initiate movement or directly drive the muscles,
but acts as a comparator and coordinator:
comparing the intended with the actual movement,
and adjusting the motor output to make the movement smooth,
accurate and well-timed; it is important in the coordination of multi-joint and
rapid movements, in the maintenance of balance and posture,
in the control of eye movements, and in motor learning — the adaptation and
learning of skilled movements.
Its functions are revealed by the effects of its damage,
which cause not weakness but incoordination — a clumsiness and inaccuracy of
movement, with a characteristic intention tremor, an unsteady gait,
and a loss of the smooth coordination of movement.
So the cerebellum coordinates and refines movement:
receiving information about the intended and actual movement and the body's
position, it acts as a comparator, adjusting the output to make movements smooth,
accurate and well-timed, and maintaining balance and aiding motor learning;
its damage causing incoordination — clumsiness,
intention tremor and unsteadiness — rather than weakness — the coordinating system
of movement.
Pull it together: how do the levels of the motor system combine to produce movement?
I would draw it together around the production of a voluntary movement as the
collaboration of the hierarchical levels and the modulating systems of the motor
system, each contributing its part.
A voluntary movement begins with the intention and planning,
in the association and premotor areas of the cortex,
which decide upon and prepare the movement.
The plan is executed by the primary motor cortex, which,
through the corticospinal tract, commands the lower motor neurons — crossing to
control the opposite side. The brainstem pathways simultaneously adjust the posture
and tone to support the movement.
The command reaches the lower motor neurons of the spinal cord — the final common
path — which, through their motor units, drive the muscles,
the force graded by recruitment.
Throughout, the two modulating systems refine the movement:
the basal ganglia help to select and initiate the desired movement and set its
amplitude, while the cerebellum compares the intended with the actual movement and
corrects it, ensuring coordination and accuracy.
The spinal reflexes and proprioceptive feedback provide the substrate.
So a movement is produced by the cortex planning and commanding it,
the corticospinal tract conveying the command to the lower motor neurons — the
final common path — which drive the muscles, with the brainstem adjusting posture,
and the basal ganglia and cerebellum modulating the selection, amplitude,
coordination and accuracy; the hierarchical levels and modulating systems
collaborating to produce smooth, accurate, purposeful movement.
Describe the premotor and supplementary motor areas and the planning of movement.
Before a voluntary movement is executed by the primary motor cortex,
it is planned and prepared by the higher motor areas — the premotor and
supplementary motor areas — and understanding their role completes the picture of
how a movement is generated.
These areas lie in the frontal lobe, just in front of the primary motor cortex,
and are concerned not with the direct execution of movement but with its planning,
preparation and selection.
The supplementary motor area is particularly involved in the planning and the
internal generation of movement sequences — the programming of a series of
movements from memory or intention — and in coordinating movements of the two sides.
The premotor area is particularly involved in preparing movements in response to
external cues, and in orienting the body for an intended action.
These areas receive information from the association cortex about the intention and
the context, devise the motor plan,
and pass it to the primary motor cortex for execution.
Their activity precedes the movement, reflecting its preparation.
Damage to them causes not weakness but disorders of the planning and initiation of
movement, such as difficulty in performing learned sequences — a form of apraxia.
So the premotor and supplementary motor areas,
in front of the primary motor cortex, plan and prepare movement:
the supplementary area programming internally-generated movement sequences and
coordinating the two sides, and the premotor area preparing cue-guided movements
and orienting for action; they devise the plan, from the intention,
and pass it to the primary cortex for execution,
their damage causing disorders of motor planning — the planning stage of voluntary
movement.
Describe the direct and indirect pathways of the basal ganglia and their relevance
to Parkinson's disease.
The basal ganglia influence movement through two opposing internal pathways — the
direct and indirect pathways — and an understanding of these, though simplified,
illuminates how they select movement and how their disorder,
as in Parkinson's disease, produces its effects.
The basal ganglia work in a loop: they receive input from the cortex, process it,
and influence, via the thalamus, the return to the cortex, so regulating movement.
Within them, two pathways act in opposition on the output.
The direct pathway, when activated,
has the net effect of facilitating movement — releasing the thalamus and so the
cortex to permit the desired movement. The indirect pathway has the net effect of
inhibiting movement — suppressing unwanted movements.
The balance between them selects the desired movement while suppressing the rest.
Both pathways are regulated by dopamine, supplied by the substantia nigra,
which facilitates the direct and inhibits the indirect pathway — so dopamine,
overall, promotes movement.
In Parkinson's disease, the dopamine-producing neurons of the substantia nigra
degenerate, so the dopamine supply is lost;
this shifts the balance towards the inhibition of movement,
producing the poverty and slowness of movement,
the rigidity and the tremor of the disease.
This understanding underlies its treatment by restoring dopamine, with levodopa.
So the basal ganglia act through a direct pathway facilitating movement and an
indirect pathway inhibiting it, their balance selecting movement,
both regulated by dopamine, which overall promotes movement;
in Parkinson's disease the loss of the nigral dopamine shifts the balance towards
inhibition, causing the poverty of movement,
rigidity and tremor — treated by restoring dopamine with levodopa — a scheme
illuminating basal ganglia function and its disorder.
Describe the functional divisions and circuitry of the cerebellum.
The cerebellum, though uniform in its basic structure,
is divided into functional regions with different connections and roles,
and an outline of these, and of its characteristic circuitry,
deepens the understanding of how it coordinates movement.
The cerebellum can be divided, by its connections, into three functional parts.
The vestibulocerebellum, the oldest part, connected with the vestibular system,
is concerned with balance, equilibrium and the control of eye movements.
The spinocerebellum, the central part,
receiving the proprioceptive information from the spinal cord about the actual
state of the body, is concerned with the coordination of ongoing movement and the
control of posture and muscle tone, comparing the intended with the actual movement.
The cerebrocerebellum, the large lateral part, connected with the cerebral cortex,
is concerned with the planning and timing of skilled,
voluntary movements and motor learning.
Throughout, the cerebellum has a uniform circuitry:
a cortex with a characteristic arrangement of cells,
receiving two great input systems — carrying information for comparison — and
giving its output through deep nuclei;
this circuitry performs the comparison and adjustment,
and is capable of the synaptic plasticity that underlies motor learning.
So the cerebellum is divided into the vestibulocerebellum,
for balance and eye movements; the spinocerebellum,
receiving proprioceptive feedback, for coordinating ongoing movement and posture;
and the cerebrocerebellum, connected with the cortex, for planning,
timing and learning skilled movements; throughout,
a uniform circuitry comparing intended with actual movement and capable of
plasticity for learning — functional divisions deepening the account of cerebellar
coordination.
Describe the brainstem postural pathways — the vestibulospinal and reticulospinal
tracts.
Alongside the corticospinal tract for voluntary movement,
the brainstem gives rise to descending pathways concerned chiefly with posture,
balance and tone, and an understanding of these completes the account of the
descending motor control.
These pathways arise from nuclei in the brainstem and descend to the spinal cord,
acting largely on the proximal and axial muscles and on muscle tone,
to maintain posture and balance — functions older than the fine voluntary control
of the corticospinal tract.
The vestibulospinal tracts arise from the vestibular nuclei,
which receive information about the position and movement of the head from the
vestibular apparatus; they act to maintain balance and upright posture,
particularly by driving the extensor,
antigravity muscles to support the body against gravity in response to the
vestibular signals.
The reticulospinal tracts arise from the reticular formation of the brainstem;
they have a complex role in posture, locomotion and the regulation of muscle tone,
with both facilitating and inhibiting influences on the spinal motor neurons and
reflexes.
These brainstem pathways are importantly involved in the control of muscle tone,
and their release or disruption contributes to the abnormal tone and posturing seen
in certain brain lesions.
So the brainstem postural pathways — the vestibulospinal tracts,
from the vestibular nuclei, driving the antigravity muscles to maintain balance and
upright posture against gravity, and the reticulospinal tracts,
from the reticular formation, regulating posture,
locomotion and muscle tone — control the proximal and axial muscles and the tone,
the older postural motor control complementing the corticospinal tract's voluntary
movement.
Describe the recruitment of motor units and the size principle.
The force a muscle produces is graded by the nervous system in an orderly way,
through the recruitment of motor units according to the size principle,
and understanding this reveals how smooth, graded control of force is achieved.
A muscle's force is increased by two means:
increasing the firing rate of the active motor units,
and recruiting additional motor units.
The recruitment follows an orderly sequence — the size principle,
described by Henneman: the motor units are recruited in order of their size,
from the smallest to the largest.
The small motor units, with small motor neurons innervating few fibres,
are recruited first; they produce small forces and are fatigue-resistant,
suited to fine control and sustained activity.
As more force is needed, progressively larger motor units are recruited,
producing larger increments of force,
the largest — powerful but more fatigable — recruited last,
for the greatest efforts.
This orderly recruitment, from small to large,
has the advantage that force is added in small increments at low force levels,
where fine control is needed, and in larger increments at high force levels;
it gives a smooth and appropriately-graded control of force across the range.
The principle arises from the properties of the motor neurons,
the smaller being more easily excited.
So muscle force is graded by recruiting motor units and increasing their firing
rate; the recruitment following the size principle — from the smallest,
fatigue-resistant units for fine control, to progressively larger,
more powerful units for greater force — adding force in fine increments at low
levels and larger ones at high, giving smooth,
graded control of force across the range.
Describe the neuromuscular junction as the final link in motor control.
The final link in the motor system,
between the lower motor neuron and the muscle fibre, is the neuromuscular junction,
and its function, as the point of transmission to the muscle,
is worth describing here, particularly as it is the site of action of the
neuromuscular blocking drugs.
The neuromuscular junction is the specialised synapse between the terminal of the
lower motor neuron and the muscle fibre.
When the action potential reaches the nerve terminal,
it triggers the release of the transmitter acetylcholine,
which crosses the narrow gap and binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on the
muscle membrane; this opens channels,
depolarising the muscle membrane to produce an end-plate potential which,
being large, reliably reaches threshold and triggers an action potential in the
muscle fibre, leading to its contraction.
The junction is normally a secure, one-to-one relay — each nerve impulse producing
a muscle impulse — with a safety margin. The acetylcholine is then broken down by
acetylcholinesterase.
This junction is the site of action of the neuromuscular blocking drugs used in
anaesthesia: the non-depolarising blockers compete with acetylcholine at the
receptor, and the depolarising blocker persistently activates it,
both producing paralysis; and the anticholinesterases reverse the non-depolarising
block.
So the neuromuscular junction is the final link,
where the lower motor neuron's action potential releases acetylcholine to bind
nicotinic receptors on the muscle, producing an end-plate potential that triggers
the muscle action potential and contraction — a secure relay with a safety margin,
the acetylcholine then broken down;
and the site of action of the neuromuscular blocking drugs — the final link in
motor control and a key target in anaesthesia.
Describe the control of eye movements.
The control of eye movements is a specialised part of the motor system,
important for vision, and an outline is worth giving,
as it illustrates several motor principles and is relevant to clinical examination.
The eyes must be moved precisely to direct the gaze, to track moving objects,
and to keep the gaze stable despite movement of the head.
Several distinct systems achieve this. The saccadic system produces the rapid,
jumping movements that shift the gaze from one target to another.
The smooth pursuit system produces the slow movements that track a moving object,
keeping its image on the fovea.
The vestibulo-ocular reflex stabilises the gaze during head movement,
moving the eyes in the opposite direction to the head,
driven by the vestibular signals, so that the image remains stable — a fast,
important reflex.
The vergence system moves the eyes in opposite directions to fixate on near or far
objects. These systems are controlled by centres in the brainstem and cortex,
and act through the nuclei of the cranial nerves that move the eye muscles.
The coordination is precise.
The examination of eye movements is valuable in localising lesions of the brainstem
and these pathways.
So eye movements are controlled by specialised systems:
the saccadic system for rapid gaze shifts, the smooth pursuit system for tracking,
the vestibulo-ocular reflex for stabilising gaze during head movement,
and the vergence system for near and far fixation;
controlled by brainstem and cortical centres acting through the cranial nerve
nuclei — a specialised motor function important for vision and valuable in clinical
localisation.
Describe the central pattern generators and the control of locomotion.
Many rhythmic, repetitive movements, such as walking,
are produced not by a continuous stream of commands from the brain but by spinal
circuits that generate the basic rhythm — central pattern generators — and
understanding this reveals an important principle of motor control.
A central pattern generator is a network of neurons,
in the spinal cord or brainstem, capable of producing a rhythmic,
patterned output on its own, without requiring a rhythmic input or sensory feedback
to drive each cycle.
For locomotion, such generators in the spinal cord can produce the basic
alternating, rhythmic pattern of activity that drives the cyclical movements of
walking — coordinating the flexors and extensors of the limbs in the proper
sequence and alternating the two sides.
The brain does not, therefore, command each step,
but rather switches the locomotor generators on and off and sets their speed and
character, while the cortex and other centres adapt the pattern to the
circumstances and the terrain.
Sensory feedback, from the limbs, is not essential to generate the rhythm but
modulates and adapts it, adjusting the stepping to the conditions.
This arrangement — a spinal generator producing the pattern,
controlled and adapted from above and modulated by feedback — simplifies the
control of complex rhythmic movement.
So central pattern generators are spinal or brainstem networks that produce a
rhythmic, patterned output on their own;
those for locomotion generating the basic alternating pattern of walking,
the brain switching them on and setting their speed rather than commanding each
step, and sensory feedback adapting the pattern — an important principle
simplifying the control of rhythmic movement such as walking.
Describe the abnormal postures of decerebrate and decorticate rigidity.
Severe brain injury can produce characteristic abnormal postures — decerebrate and
decorticate rigidity — which are clinically important as signs of the level and
severity of the injury, and which follow from the disruption of the descending
motor pathways, so they are worth describing.
These abnormal postures appear in severely brain-injured, comatose patients,
often in response to a stimulus, and reflect the release of the brainstem postural
mechanisms from higher control, the pattern depending on the level of the injury.
Decorticate rigidity, or posturing,
results from a lesion above the brainstem — in the cerebral hemispheres or the
upper midbrain — removing the cortical influence;
it is characterised by flexion of the arms, with the elbows,
wrists and fingers flexed and the arms drawn up, and extension of the legs.
Decerebrate rigidity results from a lower lesion, in the brainstem itself,
below the midbrain; it is characterised by extension of both the arms and the legs,
with the arms extended and rotated inward — a posture of generalised extension.
The decerebrate pattern, indicating a lower, more serious brainstem lesion,
generally carries a worse prognosis than the decorticate.
The patterns arise because the lesion releases the brainstem extensor mechanisms,
particularly the vestibulospinal drive to the antigravity extensors,
from inhibition.
So decorticate rigidity — flexion of the arms with extension of the legs — results
from a lesion above the brainstem releasing cortical control,
while decerebrate rigidity — extension of all four limbs — results from a lower
brainstem lesion and carries a worse prognosis;
both arising from the release of the brainstem extensor mechanisms — clinically
important signs of the level and severity of brain injury.
Describe the types of tremor and their origins.
Tremor — an involuntary, rhythmic oscillation of a part of the body — is a common
motor disturbance, and distinguishing its types by their character and origin is
clinically useful and illustrates the workings of the motor systems,
so it is worth describing.
A tremor is a rhythmic, oscillating movement produced by the alternating or
synchronous contraction of opposing muscles.
Several types are distinguished by when they occur and their associations.
A physiological tremor is the fine, fast tremor present in everyone,
usually invisible, which may become apparent when enhanced — by anxiety, fatigue,
caffeine, thyroid overactivity or certain drugs.
A resting tremor, present when the limb is at rest and characteristically reduced
by movement, is typical of Parkinson's disease and disorders of the basal ganglia —
a slow, coarse tremor.
An action, or postural, tremor, present when the limb is held against gravity or
used, includes the enhanced physiological tremor and the essential tremor,
a common condition.
An intention tremor, which appears and worsens as the limb approaches a target
during a movement, is characteristic of cerebellar disease,
reflecting the loss of cerebellar coordination.
So the types of tremor are distinguished by their occurrence and origin:
the physiological tremor, fine and enhanced by anxiety and other factors;
the resting tremor of Parkinson's disease and basal ganglia disorders,
reduced by movement; the action or postural tremor, including essential tremor;
and the intention tremor of cerebellar disease,
worsening towards a target — distinctions clinically useful and illustrative of the
motor systems whose disorder they reflect.
Describe the concept of the pyramidal and extrapyramidal systems.
The terms pyramidal and extrapyramidal are traditionally used to divide the motor
system, and although the distinction is something of a simplification,
it remains clinically useful, so it is worth explaining.
The pyramidal system refers to the corticospinal tract — so named because it passes
through the pyramids of the medulla — the direct pathway from the cortex to the
spinal motor neurons for voluntary, particularly skilled and fine, movement;
a pyramidal, or upper motor neuron,
lesion produces the characteristic picture of weakness with spasticity,
increased reflexes and an extensor plantar response.
The term extrapyramidal refers, in this traditional usage,
to the other motor systems outside the pyramidal tract — in practice chiefly the
basal ganglia and their connections — concerned with the modulation of movement,
posture and tone.
Disorders of this system — the extrapyramidal disorders — produce a characteristic
group of disturbances of movement control, quite different from pyramidal weakness:
either a poverty of movement with rigidity and tremor, as in Parkinson's disease,
or excessive involuntary movements; and the drugs that disturb the basal ganglia,
such as certain antipsychotics, cause extrapyramidal side effects.
The distinction is a simplification, since the systems interact,
but it usefully separates the pyramidal weakness-and-spasticity picture from the
extrapyramidal disorders of movement control.
So the pyramidal system is the corticospinal tract for voluntary movement,
its lesion causing weakness with spasticity; while the extrapyramidal system,
in traditional usage, refers chiefly to the basal ganglia, modulating movement,
its disorders causing the characteristic disturbances of movement control — poverty
of movement or involuntary movements;
a simplified but clinically useful distinction.
Describe motor learning.
The motor system is capable of learning — of acquiring and refining skilled
movements with practice — and motor learning is an important function,
of relevance to recovery from injury,
that draws on the plasticity of the motor structures, so it is worth describing.
Motor learning is the process by which movements are acquired,
refined and made more skilled and automatic through practice.
It is evident in the learning of any skill, from walking to playing an instrument,
in which the movements become progressively more accurate, smoother,
faster and less effortful with practice, eventually becoming automatic.
Several structures contribute.
The cerebellum is particularly important,
using the feedback about the errors of movement to adjust and refine it,
and its plasticity allows the lasting adaptation of movements — motor adaptation.
The basal ganglia are important in the learning of motor habits and sequences,
and in the procedural learning of skills. The motor cortex itself shows plasticity,
its representations changing with practice as a skill is learned.
These changes depend on the synaptic plasticity — the strengthening and weakening
of synapses — that underlies learning generally.
Motor learning is important not only in acquiring skills but in the recovery of
function after injury, in which the nervous system relearns and reorganises.
So motor learning is the acquisition and refinement of skilled movements through
practice, making them accurate, smooth and automatic;
the cerebellum refining movement through error feedback and adaptation,
the basal ganglia learning habits and sequences,
and the motor cortex showing plasticity — all depending on synaptic plasticity;
important in acquiring skills and in the recovery of function after injury.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The motor system is hierarchical: the cortex (intention, planning,
initiation), the brainstem and descending pathways (translating the plan, posture),
and the spinal cord (motor neurons + reflex circuits, the final common path);
modulated by two systems that don't drive muscle directly — the basal ganglia and
cerebellum — which refine movement.
Second, The lower motor neuron (ventral horn/brainstem) + the muscle fibres it
innervates = the motor unit (smallest functional unit);
force is graded by recruiting units and increasing firing rate.
The lower motor Third, The primary motor cortex (frontal lobe,
before the central sulcus) executes voluntary movement via the corticospinal
(pyramidal) tract, organised somatotopically (motor homunculus — area proportional
to precision of control).
The corticospinal tract crosses in the medullary pyramids,
so each cortex controls the opposite side (a lesion above the crossing →
contralateral weakness); brainstem pathways (vestibulospinal,
reticulospinal) control posture, balance and tone.
Fourth, Upper motor neuron lesion (descending pathways): weakness with spasticity,
exaggerated reflexes, extensor plantar,
little wasting (lower motor neuron released from cortical control).
Lower motor neuron lesion: weakness with flaccidity, lost reflexes, wasting,
fasciculations (muscle denervated) — a contrast central to clinical localisation.
Fifth, Basal ganglia (deep nuclei, cortico-thalamic loops,
dopamine from substantia nigra): select/initiate desired movements,
suppress unwanted ones, regulate amplitude — dysfunction causes movement-control
disorders (e.g.
Parkinson's: poverty of movement, rigidity, tremor from dopamine loss).
Cerebellum: a comparator coordinating timing/accuracy and balance — damage causes
incoordination, intention tremor and unsteadiness, NOT weakness.
Thank you. That concludes the station.